Then we have the next question,
what gets logged?
We have a setTimeout that
has a callback with a log.
Then we have a Promise.resolve with
a then callback, which also logs 2.
We have a Promise.resolve with a then
callback, which has a setTimeout,
which logs 3.
Then we have a new Promise that logs 4,
and a setTimeout that logs 5.
So what gets logged when
we execute the script?
So the right answer is D,
it's 4, 2, 1, 5, 3.
So this is just the first time
that we're using the event loop.
So just to make sure everyone is on
the same level, we have a call stack,
which is just a stack that keeps track
of the sequence of function calls in
their execution context.
So every time we call a function or
even just a global context,
it creates an execution context for that,
which contains the code and any variables,
everything it needs to execute, and
then it pushes that to a call stack.
We've got a web API, which is just
a set of features that kind of extend
JavaScript's built-in functionality so
we can use the web,
including DOM manipulation, but
also timers, setTimeout and fetch.
Then we have the macrotask queue,
or just a task queue,
which contains all the setTimeout
callbacks, the setInterval callbacks,
any UI rendering tasks, user input events,
and also network events.
Then we have a microtask queue,
which contains promise callbacks,
queueMicrotask callbacks, any async
awaits, and MutationObserver callbacks.
And then finally,
we have the event loop, which is really
just a loop that keeps track of any
tasks that are currently in the queue and
then pushes those to the call stack.
It's important to remember that first
it wants to get all the microtasks out
of the queue and then it goes back to
the task queue, the normal task queue.
So in this case,
let's just go through it step by step.
So first we have a setTimeout call,
that just get pushed to the call stack.
But this setTimeout
itself is a web API and
the callback that we provided is
actually pushed to the web API.
Now, we haven't defined any timer here.
Normally, you can always
setTimeout at maybe 2,000 or
3,000, in the case that we
don't provide it, it's 0.
But that doesn't mean that
it gets executed right away,
it still gets pushed to the web API.
But it instantly gets then pushed back to
the normal task queue on the next tick
cuz the task queue had these
set timeout callbacks.
So on the second line we have the
Promise.resolve which just gets called,
and when you call Promise.resolve it just
instantly returns a resolved promise.
So it can instantly
call the then function,
which we provided, or
that the Promise.resolve can access.
And as we saw before,
the microtask queue contains all
the callbacks from any promises.
So that callback that we provided
is scheduled as a microtask queue.
Then we have another Promise.resolve,
which works the same way.
But this time, when it then gets called,
it actually schedules the microtask queue
again, but
it has the setTimeout in here as well.
But that doesn't run yet,
it's just scheduled to run in the future.
Now, we have a new Promise constructor,
but
the function that we pass to this
new Promise just runs synchronously.
So it actually just runs the callback
function and it logs for right away.
So that's important to remember is that
a new Promise body runs synchronously,
it only returns a Promise.
So 4 gets logged, as a first value,
and then we have another setTimeout,
which works the same way as we saw before.
SetTimeout gets pushed to the call
stack and it's returned callback
gets first pushed to the web API, and
then back to the normal task queue.
So now it's up to the event loop to see,
all right, I've got some tasks queued up,
but first let's get rid of
those microtasks in the queue.
So first it invokes this callback, which
logs 2, get popped out of this call stack.
And then we have another callback
that returns a setTimeout.
So it calls a setTimeout, it's a timeout
again returns its callback to the web API,
which eventually will log 3.
So on the next tick, this also gets
pushed to the normal task queue.
Now, again, I list the timeout callback
for the first one, which logs 1,
so 1 gets logged here, cuz off because
there was no microtasks anymore.
Sorry, I forgot to mention that.
So it just turned back to the normal task
queue to get rid of all the tasks there.
Then we have the callback for
logging 5, so it just logs 5.
And the same happens for 3,
callback 3 invokes it, gets called, and
eventually 3 gets called.
So this is what we ended up with,
4, 2, 1, 5, 3.
Make sense?
[LAUGH] Any question?
>> What was the name of the site that you
said that stacks could be popped visually?
>> I think there's a site called Loop.
It was someone, I forgot his name, he did
a very famous talk on the event loop and
he created a pretty simple website
that has the call stack and then,
I think the task queue.
So you can kind of see where things go,
but
it doesn't really include the microtask
queue or any of that stuff.
It also uses jQuery, so
depends on what you like to use, but yeah.
>> Could you explain how new Promise
=> console.log(4) gets executed?
>> Yeah, so I'll just go all the way back.
So when we have the new Promise
constructor, it's important to remember,
I know there's a better name for the
function that we pass to the new promise.
I forgot what it was, I think it's called
the executor function or something,
that function runs synchronously.
So if we just had a new Promise and
we had a longer function there,
it'll run synchronously.
And normally you have new Promise resolve
reject that you kinda actually pass as
arguments there.
Only when we invoke those methods,
those methods will return a Promise and
that's when it gets scheduled as a task.
But the body itself runs synchronously,
if that makes sense.
So a new Promise instantly executes
its own callback executor function.
There's a better word for that function,
and I'm trying to remember it, and
I can't remember it.
But yeah, this is just a common kind of
misconception when working with promises,
is that a lot of the code actually
still runs synchronously,
it's only the return values
format that are async.
So just make sure that you're not running
into any unexpected behavior there when
you think that the entire callback
there is async, cuz it's not.
>> Does setTimeout or any web API
really pushed to the call stack or
is it return the code
when time is finished?
>> So the web API itself doesn't
call to the call stack immediately,
the timer just defines the time that it
can get pushed through the task queue.
So when we set a timer for 1,000
milliseconds, it doesn't mean that it will
execute in 1,000 milliseconds
if the task queue isn't empty.
If that is still full,
it might run in 2,000 milliseconds,
depends on how busy that task queue is.
So that's important to remember.
The delay is just when the web API
pushes it to the task queue and
not when it pushes it to the call stack.
That only happens if it's the first
one in the task queue and
there's no microtasks queued up.
Yeah.
>> This is a consequence of everything
running on one thread, correct?
>> That's right, yes.
So normally or
JavaScript only has a single thread, and
if we were to run
everything synchronously,
initially you had these callbacks
you could pass everywhere.
In your code looked horrible,
it's got like callback hell,
you ended up with this kind
of C shape of callbacks.
So that's kind of why the web had
to invent something where some
asynchronous behavior was still allowed.
So setTimeout isn't part of
JavaScript itself, right?
It's just the web.
So for example, and I think Node also
implements it, but they all have their own
implementation cuz they all use
different APIs under the hood.
But yeah, this was kinda the first
asynchronous behavior in JavaScript,
even though it's not entirely
asynchronous, right?
Cuz it's still just happening all there.
>> So in order to get to the call stack,
does it clear in this order,
micro, macro, web,
call stack, and then end?
>> No, so
that's kind of half correct, sorry,
I just wanted to get through
all these steps again.
So the event loop doesn't
check the web API.
The web API, or in this case,
the timer that setTimeout provides,
that only just pushes to the task queue,
right?
The event loop is just to check
the task queue and the microtask queue.
So the web API's only responsibility, or
in setTimeout's particular, or
for setTimeout specifically,
is to push to the task queue when
the timer is done or has timed out.
So yeah, it's not like the event
loop first goes to the task queue,
then the microtask queue,
then the web API,
that's false, it doesn't check
the web API, if that makes sense.
So the web API is just to push to that,
or setTimeout,
just to push to the task queue
when the timer has timed out.
Yeah, it's always fun?
Event loops, it's not confusing at all.
>> And the main difference is
between the microtask queue and
the macrotask queue are?
>> So here's just a setTimeout callbacks,
not the setTimeout function itself,
they're callbacks.
The setTimeout callbacks, you write
rendering tasks, user input events, and
network events.
And then on the microtask, we have those
promise callbacks that we saw earlier.
The queueMicrotask, which is pretty
straightforward, async/await and we'll
talk more about that later how that works,
and also MutationObserver callbacks.
So yeah, it's just kind of like a defined
list of things that get scheduled to
the regular task queue
versus the microtask queue.
And normally microtasks run after
every task, kinda like they allow for
these smaller updates, which is especially
important for these smoother interactions.
So it's like task, microtask,
microtask, those, I don't know, you can
kind of see it in your network inspector
or your dev tool sometimes, yeah.
>> So the microtask is prioritized-
>> Yeah.
>> Over the other tasks?
That's the one that if it's full,
it will be executed in the next cycle.
>> That's correct, yeah.
And first, make sure that the microtask
queue is entirely empty before it turns
back to the regular task queue.